>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, AUGUST 8: LIFE IN
PRISON-- REACTION TO THE
SENTENCE FOR THE AURORA,
COLORADO, MOVIE THEATER GUNMAN;
ISIS CAPTURES A STRATEGIC SYRIAN
CITY; AND IN OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, FACING LIFE OR DEATH
DECISIONS WITH YOUR DOCTOR AND
YOUR FAMILY.
>> FROM "KEEP ME ALIVE NO
MATTER WHAT, AS LONG AS MEDICINE
CAN DO THAT," TO "I JUST WANT TO
BE HOME WITH MY FAMILY, WITH
HOSPICE," TO ANYTHING IN
BETWEEN.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS OF
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THERE IS A MIX OF ANGER AND
ACCEPTANCE IN COLORADO AFTER A
JURY DECLINED TO SENTENCE JAMES
HOLMES TO DEATH FOR HIS MASS
SHOOTING INSIDE A MOVIE THEATER
THREE YEARS AGO.
BECAUSE THE JURY COULD NOT COME
TO A UNANIMOUS DECISION TO
IMPOSE THE DEATH PENALTY, HOLMES
WILL SPEND THE REST OF HIS LIFE
IN PRISON WITHOUT THE
POSSIBILITY OF PAROLE.
HOLMES SHOT AND KILLED 12 PEOPLE
AND WOUNDED 70 OTHERS DURING A
MIDNIGHT PREMIERE OF THE BATMAN
MOVIE "THE DARK KNIGHT RISES" IN
THE DENVER SUBURB OF AURORA.
ONE ANONYMOUS JUROR TOLD
REPORTERS OUTSIDE COURT THE
PANEL VOTED 9-3 FOR DEATH, AND
THE DEFENDANT'S MENTAL ILLNESS
PLAYED INTO THEIR DECISION "MORE
THAN ANYTHING ELSE."
>> AT THE POINT WHERE WE KNEW
THAT ONE WAS AN ABSOLUTE
HOLDOUT, WE ENDED THE
DELIBERATIONS BECAUSE THAT
PERSON WAS SOLIDLY IN FAVOR OF
THE LIFE SENTENCE.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME VICTIMS'
FAMILIES SAY THEY ARE RELIEVED
THE THREE-AND-A-HALF MONTH TRIAL
IS OVER.
OTHERS ARE DISAPPOINTED BY THE
SENTENCE.
>> WE HAVE SAID FROM THE
BEGINNING THAT WE DIDN'T CARE
WHAT THE VERDICT WAS AT THE END,
WHETHER HE GOT LIFE OR DEATH,
AND THAT STILL REMAINS TRUE.
BUT I'M REALLY GLAD WE WENT
THROUGH THIS PROCESS.
>> THE GAPING WOUND THAT WE HAVE
WITH THE LOSS OF OUR
GRANDDAUGHTER HAS BEEN REPLACED
WITH A NEW ABSCESS OF HIM
LIVING.
>> Sreenivasan: HOLMES COULD END
UP IN PROTECTIVE CUSTODY OR EVEN
BE MOVED OUT OF STATE.
HIS PARENTS, WHO HAD TESTIFIED
TO SPARE HIS LIFE, SAID THROUGH
A SPOKESWOMAN THEY ARE "SO SORRY
THE VICTIMS AND FAMILIES HAVE
SUFFERED SUCH TREMENDOUS LOSS."
THE MASS SHOOTINGS IN AURORA,
TUCSON, NEWTOWN AND OTHER CITIES
HAVE NOT LED TO STRICTER
NATIONAL GUN LAWS OR EVEN
TOUGHER BACKGROUND CHECKS, BUT A
NEW PROPOSAL MAY CHANGE THAT.
TEXAS REPUBLICAN SENATOR JOHN
CORNYN IS SPONSORING A BILL
TO HELP STATES BETTER REPORT
PEOPLE KNOWN TO BE MENTALLY ILL
TO THE F.B.I. DATABASE OF
INDIVIDUALS PROHIBITED FROM
BUYING GUNS.
JOINING ME NOW FOR MORE ON THIS
DEVELOPMENT IS "WASHINGTON POST"
REPORTER MIKE DEBONIS.
SO, I REMEMBER AFTER IN 2013
THE SORT OF GUN CONTROL
LEGISLATION AFTER THE NEWTOWN
MASSACRE DIDN'T GO VERY FAR.
WHAT'S SO DIFFERENT ABOUT THIS?
>> SURE, THANKS, HARI.
IT'S PRETTY SIMPLE.
WHAT'S DIFFERENT ABOUT THIS IS
THAT THIS BILL HAS, AT LEAST AT
THIS POINT, THE BACKING OF THE
NATIONAL RIFLE ASSOCIATION,
WHICH IS PRETTY MUCH A
PREREQUISITE FOR GETTING
ANYTHING RELATED TO GUNS OR
BACKGROUND CHECKS OR ANYTHING
RELATED TO FIREARMS THROUGH THIS
REPUBLICAN CONGRESS.
SO, YOU KNOW, THE FACT THAT THIS
IS BEING SPONSORED BY AN A-PLUS
RATED N.R.A. MEMBER, AND THE
FACT THAT, YOU KNOW, YOU HAVE A
WHOLE DIFFERENT COALITION
INVOLVING MENTAL HEALTH
ADVOCATES AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
WHO ARE ALSO BACKING THIS BILL,
GIVES IT... MEANS THAT THIS IS
SOMEWHAT DIFFERENT FROM WHAT WE
SAW AFTER NEWTOWN.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW, THERE'S A
PROVISION IN HERE WHERE A JUDGE
CAN IMPOSE TREATMENT ON SOMEONE
WITHOUT HAVING THEM COMMITTED.
I MEAN, THAT'S A DISTINCTION
THAT'S PRETTY IMPORTANT.
>> RIGHT.
WHAT SENATOR CORNYN'S BILL WOULD
DO IS EXPAND WHAT'S CURRENTLY
DONE IN A NUMBER OF STATES,
WHEREBY FAMILY MEMBERS OR
OUTSIDE PARTIES COULD PETITION A
COURT TO PROVIDE VOLUNTARY
TREATMENT FOR AN INDIVIDUAL
RATHER THAN GO AS FAR AS TO HAVE
AN INVOLUNTARY COMMITMENT.
THE CATCH IS THAT, UNDER THIS
BILL, THE FACT THAT SOMEBODY
ENTERED A VOLUNTARY MENTAL
HEALTH TREATMENT PROGRAM, THAT
WOULD NOT KEEP THEM FROM BEING
ABLE TO GO AND BUY A GUN.
THE FACT WOULD REMAIN THAT YOU
WOULD HAVE TO BE INVOLUNTARY
COMMITTED TO BE BARRED FROM
BUYING A GUN.
CURRENTLY, TO GET YOUR RIGHT TO
BUY A GUN BACK, YOU HAVE TO GO
BEFORE A JUDGE AND PROVE THAT
YOU'RE CAPABLE AND ABLE TO HAVE
A FIREARM.
UNDER THIS BILL, WHAT WOULD
HAPPEN WOULD BE AS SOON AS THE
ORDER, THE COMMITMENT ORDER
EXPIRED, YOU WOULD AUTOMATICALLY
BE ABLE TO GO AND PURCHASE A GUN
AGAIN.
>> Sreenivasan: SPEAKING OF
PURCHASING A GUN, GUN CONTROL
ADVOCATES POINT OUT THIS DOESN'T
CLOSE WHAT THEY CALL THE GUN
SHOW LOOPHOLE.
>> RIGHT.
THAT'S ABSOLUTELY TRUE.
THE GUN SHOW LOOPHOLE IS WHAT
WAS AT ISSUE IN THE LEGISLATION
THAT WAS PROPOSED AFTER NEWTOWN
IN 2013.
THAT'S LEGISLATION THAT THE
N.R.A. INITIALLY INDICATED THEY
MIGHT BE ABLE TO SUPPORT, BUT
THEY WITHDREW THAT SUPPORT, AND
ONLY I BELIEVE 54 SENATORS WERE
ABLE TO SUPPORT THAT IN THE
SENATE.
NOTHING GETS DONE UNLESS YOU GET
60 SENATORS.
AND SINCE THEN, THE SENATE HAS
GOTTEN EVEN MORE CONSERVATIVE.
SO, THERE'S REALLY... IT'S
PRETTY WELL KNOWN THAT THERE'S
NO CHANCE FOR THE GUN SHOW
BACKGROUND CHECK BILL SIMILAR TO
WHAT WE SAW IN 2013 TO SUCCEED
IN THIS CONGRESS.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, WHAT'S THE
LIKELIHOOD OF THIS PIECE OF
LEGISLATION MAKING IT TO THE
FLOOR?
>> WELL, IT HAS A LOT GOING FOR
IT.
NUMBER ONE, THE FACT THAT THE
N.R.A. ISN'T OPPOSING IT.
AND, IN FACT, APPEARS TO BE
ENDORSING IT.
NUMBER TWO, IT'S BEING SPONSORED
BY JOHN CORNYN, WHO IS THE
NUMBER TWO REASONING REPUBLICAN
IN G.O.P. LEADERSHIP IN THE
SENATE.
HE'S THE MAJORITY WHIP.
HE'S A SENIOR MEMBER OF THE
JUDICIARY COMMITTEE, WHICH WOULD
HAVE TO HANDLE THIS BILL.
I THINK THAT THOSE ARE BOTH
THINGS THAT WOULD INDICATE THAT
THIS WOULD HAVE A PRETTY, YOU
KNOW, HIGH CHANCE OF LIKELIHOOD
THAT IT COULD MOVE SUCCESSFULLY
THROUGH THE SENATE.
BUT KEEP IN MIND, WE'RE, YOU
KNOW, APPROACHING AN ELECTION
YEAR.
WE'RE ALREADY VERY MUCH IN THE
MIDDLE OF AN ELECTION DEBATE.
AND THE CLOSER YOU GET TO THE
ELECTION, THE MORE THAT, YOU
KNOW, EVEN ANYTHING ON ANY SORT
OF CONTROVERSIAL MATTER CAN GET
CAUGHT UP IN ANY SORT OF SIDE
ISSUE AND GET SIDETRACKED.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT.
"WASHINGTON POST" REPORTER MIKE
DeBONIS, THANKS SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US.
>> THANKS, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: THE U.S.-LED
COALITION IS CARRYING OUT MORE
AIR STRIKES ON THE ISLAMIC
STATE, OR ISIS, POSITIONS IN
SYRIA AND IRAQ.
19 STRIKES WERE CARRIED OUT ON
FRIDAY, ACCORDING TO THE COMMAND
JOINT TASK FORCE.
IN THE CENTRAL SYRIAN CITY OF
QARYATAIN IN HOMS PROVINCE, ISIS
IS SAID TO BE HOLDING MORE THAN
200 RESIDENTS CAPTIVE.
MOST OF THE CIVILIANS ARE
BELIEVED TO BE FROM CHRISTIAN
FAMILIES, INCLUDING DOZENS OF
WOMEN AND CHILDREN.
THE BRITISH HUMAN RIGHTS GROUP
SYRIAN OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS SAYS ISIS SEIZED THE CITY
OF 40,000 PEOPLE AFTER THREE
SEPARATE SUICIDE ATTACKS ON
CHECKPOINTS GUARDED BY ARMY
FORCES LOYAL TO SYRIAN PRESIDENT
BASHAR ASSAD.
"NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTER BEN
HUBBARD JOINS ME NOW VIA SKYPE
FROM GAZIANTEP, TURKEY, WITH THE
LATEST ON THE CONFLICTS.
SO, WE HAVE A COUPLE OF HUNDRED
PEOPLE THAT ARE ESSENTIALLY
MISSING RIGHT NOW.
ANY WORD ON WHAT'S HAPPENING TO
THE WOMEN OR CHILDREN?
I MEAN, ISIS HAS PATTERNS OF
TAKING THESE PEOPLE IN THE PAST.
>> WELL, THE PICTURE IS STILL
VERY UNCLEAR.
THE TOWN IS VERY FAR AWAY, AND
WE'VE HAD EVERYBODY WATCHING
THIS AND JUST SAID THE
COMMUNICATIONS ARE COMPLETELY
GONE WITH THE TOWNS.
IT'S VERY HARD TO GET GOOD
INFORMATION.
YOU HAVE HAD A LOT OF PEOPLE
FLEEING FROM THE TOWNS TO OTHER
AREAS.
THERE HAS BEEN FIGHTING IN OTHER
COMMUNITIES THAT ARE SOMEWHAT
NEARBY.
BUT WHAT WE KNOW IS THAT THERE
ARE SOMEWHERE AROUND 200, 230
PEOPLE THAT ARE JUST OUT OF
CONTACT, SO THIS HAS RAISED A
LOT OF WORRIES WITH THE SYRIAN
ORTHODOX CHURCH AND WITH OTHER
CONFLICT MONITORS.
THIS IS ONE OF THE TOWNS THAT
HAS A SUBSTANTIAL CHRISTIAN
POPULATION, AND NOBODY REALLY
KNOWS WHAT'S HAPPENING WITH
THEM.
THERE WERE REPORTS YESTERDAY
THAT SOME HAD BEEN ACTUALLY
ARRESTED AND DETAINED, AND
OTHERS WERE PUT UNDER A FORM OF
HOUSE ARREST WHERE THE JIHADISTS
WERE MAKING THEM STAY IN THEIR
HOMES.
THIS COULD BE BECAUSE THERE WAS
SOME KIND OF RESISTANCE IN THE
TOWN WHEN THEY WERE COMING IN,
AND SO THE ISLAMIC STATE IS
TRYING TO FIND OUT WHO ARE THE
FIGHTERS AND WHO ARE THE
CIVILIANS.
OR IT COULD BE THAT IN OTHER
TIMES THEY'VE KIDNAPPED LARGE
NUMBERS OF PEOPLE AND JUST USED
THEM FOR NEGOTIATIONS, THINGS
LIKE THAT.
IN SYRIA, AT LEAST, ISIS HAS NOT
CARRIED OUT MASS KILLINGS OF
CHRISTIANS.
I MEAN, THEY CERTAINLY WILL KILL
MANY SHIITES OR PEOPLE FROM THE
ALAWITE SECT AND OTHER SECTS
THAT THEY GET THEIR HANDS ON.
BUT WE DON'T HAVE LARGE CASES OF
ISIS MASSACRING CHRISTIANS, AS
WE'VE SEEN THE ISIS BRANCHES IN
OTHER COUNTRIES AND STUFF.
BUT A LOT OF TIMES THEY'LL KEEP
THESE PEOPLE AND TRY TO USE THEM
IN PRISONER SWAPS, THEY'LL TRY
TO USE THEM TO PUT PRESSURE ON
THE GOVERNMENT.
BUT SO FAR WE HAVE NO
INFORMATION... VERY LITTLE
INFORMATION ABOUT THE FATE OF
THESE PEOPLE AND WHAT THEY
INTEND TO DO WITH THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, WHY IS
THIS TOWN GEOGRAPHICALLY
SIGNIFICANT?
>> WELL, IT IS KIND OF A
CROSSROADS TOWN.
IT'S A SMALL TOWN, BUT IT JUST
PUTS ISIS ONE STEP CLOSER TO
SOME OTHER VERY KEY PLACES THAT
ARE STILL UNDER CONTROL OF THE
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT.
SO, THIS PUTS THEM A LITTLE
CLOSER TO THE CITY OF HOMS,
WHICH WAS A BIG BATTLE ZONE
BETWEEN THE OPPOSITION THAT THE
GOVERNMENT ACTUALLY WON.
AND SO THIS PUTS ISIS NOW ONE
STEP CLOSER TO THAT.
IT PUTS ISIS ONE STEP CLOSER TO
SOME KEY HIGHWAYS AS WELL THAT
CONNECT HOMS TO DAMASCUS AND
CONNECTS TO OTHER PARTS OF THE
COUNTRY.
SO, THE TOWN ITSELF ISN'T, I
WOULDN'T SAY, THAT STRATEGIC,
BUT IT JUST PUTS THEM ONE STEP
CLOSER TO SOME OTHER PLACES
WHERE'S THEY MAY BE ABLE TO
CAUSE MORE TROUBLE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, BEN
HUBBARD FROM "NEW YORK TIMES,"
JOINING US VIA SKYPE FROM
GAZIANTEP, TURKEY.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: THE U.S. NAVY IS
PLANNING TO POST ARMED GUARDS AT
SOME RESERVE CENTERS.
THE GUARDS WILL BE POSTED ONLY
AT THE 70 RESERVE CENTERS WITH
PUBLIC ACCESS.
BUT THE NAVY WILL
NOT POST ARMED GUARDS AT
RECRUITING CENTERS.
THE MOVE FOLLOWS THE FATAL
SHOOTING OF FIVE UNARMED
SERVICEMEN AT A CHATTANOOGA,
TENNESSEE, RESERVE CENTER LAST
MONTH.
THE NEW GUARDS ARE EXPECTED TO
BE IN PLACE BY MID-OCTOBER.
THE NAVY IS THE FIRST BRANCH OF
THE U.S. MILITARY TO ANNOUNCE
THAT IT WILL GUARD ITS OFF-BASE
FACILITIES.
THE E.P.A. IS CLEANING UP AND
APOLOGIZING FOR AN ONGOING TOXIC
SPILL IN A COLORADO RIVER.
THE ANIMAS RIVER, IN THE
SOUTHWESTERN PART OF THE STATE,
HAS FILLED WITH A SOUPY, ORANGE-
COLORED FLUID.
THE PROBLEM BEGAN WEDNESDAY WHEN
AN E.P.A. CREW CLEANING UP AN
INACTIVE GOLD MINE ACCIDENTALLY
CAUSED A MILLION GALLONS OF
WASTEWATER TO FLOW INTO A CREEK
THAT CONNECTS TO THE RIVER.
TODAY, THE MINE WAS STILL
DISCHARGING WATER CONTAMINATED
WITH ARSENIC, LEAD, ALUMINUM AND
COPPER.
THE E.P.A. IS WARNING PEOPLE AND
PETS TO STAY AWAY FROM THE RIVER
AS THE SPILL HEADS DOWNSTREAM
TOWARD NEW MEXICO AND UTAH.
OFFICIALS HAVE RELEASED CLEAN
WATER FROM A NEARBY DAM TO
DILUTE THE METALS IN THE RIVER,
AND THEY ARE BUILDING A
RETENTION POND TO REDIRECT
POLLUTED WATER.
AMERICAN SWIMMER KATIE LEDECKY
HAS WON HER FOURTH INDIVIDUAL
GOLD MEDAL AT THE WORLD
CHAMPIONSHIPS IN RUSSIA.
THE 18-YEAR-OLD MARYLAND NATIVE
TOOK THE 800-METER FREESTYLE
TODAY IN WORLD RECORD TIME.
THE VICTORY ADDS TO HER WINS
THIS WEEK IN THE 200, 400 AND
1,500 METER RACES.
LEDECKY IS THE FIRST WOMAN TO
SWEEP FOUR INDIVIDUAL GOLDS AT
THE WORLD CHAMPIONSHIPS.
SHE ALSO LED THE AMERICAN
WOMEN'S TEAM TO GOLD IN THE
4 x 200-METER FREESTYLE RELAY.
>> Sreenivasan: OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT TONIGHT LOOKS AT THE
MOVEMENT TO ENCOURAGE PEOPLE TO
THINK AND TALK MORE ABOUT DEATH
LONG BEFORE THE INEVITABLE
HAPPENS.
THE IDEA IS TO ENCOURAGE
FAMILIES TO PLAN THEIR END OF
LIFE DECISIONS, AND IT BEGINS
WITH A CONVERSATION WITH YOUR
LOVED ONES AND WITH YOUR FAMILY
DOCTOR.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
LYNN SHERR HAS THIS UPDATED
REPORT, WHICH ORIGINALLY AIRED
THIS SPRING.
>> WHAT'S THE MATTER, MAMA?
>> I'M DYING, FORREST.
>> Reporter: IT'S BEEN A
HOLLYWOOD STAPLE FOR DECADES:
THE DEATHBED SCENE.
HERE, FORREST GUMP'S MOM-- SALLY
FIELD-- REMINDING HER SON,
PLAYED BY TOM HANKS, THAT DEATH
IS A NATURAL PART OF LIFE.
BUT WHEN END-OF-LIFE
CONVERSATIONS WITH DOCTORS WERE
ENCOURAGED BY THE GOVERNMENT
BACK IN 2009 DURING THE
OBAMACARE DEBATE, OPPONENTS
CALLED THEM "DEATH PANELS," AND
THE IDEA BECAME TOXIC.
SOME CALLED IT "PULLING THE PLUG
ON GRANDMA."
THAT WAS THEN.
>> IT IS EXACTLY THE OPPOSITE.
IT IS ABOUT GRANDMA CONTROLLING
THE PLUG.
>> Reporter: DR. LACHLAN FORROW,
A SPECIALIST IN ETHICS AND
PALLIATIVE CARE AT BOSTON'S BETH
ISRAEL DEACONESS MEDICAL CENTER,
IS AT THE FOREFRONT OF A NEW
NATIONAL MOVEMENT TO MAKE
TALKING ABOUT DEATH PUBLIC
POLICY.
HE CHAIRED THE EXPERT MEDICAL
PANEL THAT HELPED LEAD TO NEW
MASSACHUSETTS REGULATIONS-- THE
FIRST IN THE NATION WHICH TOOK
EFFECT IN DECEMBER-- MANDATING
THAT HEALTH FACILITIES FROM
HOSPITALS TO ASSISTED LIVING
COMMUNITIES TELL TERMINALLY ILL
PATIENTS THEIR END-OF-LIFE
OPTIONS.
>> THE FULL RANGE OF THEIR
CHOICES, FROM "KEEP ME ALIVE NO
MATTER WHAT, AS LONG AS MEDICINE
CAN DO THAT," TO "I JUST WANT TO
BE HOME WITH MY FAMILY, WITH
HOSPICE," TO ANYTHING IN BETWEEN
OR ANY SEQUENCE.
WE ARE JUST STARTING TO EMERGE
SO THAT POLITICIANS AND OTHERS
REALIZE THIS IS NOT THE THIRD
RAIL OF POLITICS.
>> Reporter: SINCE THIS STORY
FIRST AIRED, A MAJOR
DEVELOPMENT.
LAST MONTH, SIX YEARS AFTER THE
ORIGINAL OBAMACARE END-OF-LIFE
PROPOSAL WAS ABANDONED, MEDICARE
ANNOUNCED PLANS TO REIMBURSE
DOCTORS FOR HAVING THOSE
CONVERSATIONS WITH PATIENTS.
SUPPORTERS CALL IT A MAJOR
VICTORY AND HOPE THE DECISION
WILL SPUR MORE PRIVATE INSURERS
TO PAY FOR THE TALKS, TOO.
AMONG THE CRITICAL FIRST STEPS:
SIGNING AN ADVANCE DIRECTIVE AND
A HEALTH CARE PROXY SO SOMEONE
YOU TRUST CAN LEGALLY MAKE
DECISIONS IF YOU'RE
INCAPACITATED.
THE MEDICARE PLAN WILL LIKELY
TAKE EFFECT IN JANUARY, BUT
HOLDING SUCH PRIVATE
CONVERSATIONS IN THE PUBLIC
ARENA MAY REQUIRE A NEW
APPROACH, AS ADVOCATES IN
MASSACHUSETTS HAVE LEARNED.
>> SOMETIMES PEOPLE THINK YOU
TALK ABOUT DYING AND YOU LET IT
INTO THE ROOM.
(LAUGHS)
>> Reporter: PULITZER PRIZE-
WINNING JOURNALIST ELLEN GOODMAN
IS ON A MISSION TO MAKE DEATH
PART OF POPULAR CONVERSATION.
FOR MORE THAN 35 YEARS, SHE
CHRONICLED AMERICAN SOCIAL
CHANGE IN HER WIDELY SYNDICATED
COLUMNS FOR THE "BOSTON GLOBE."
SHE WROTE ABOUT THE VALUES
INSTILLED IN HER AS A CHILD BY
HER FATHER, WHO HELPED RUN JOHN
F. KENNEDY'S FIRST SENATE
CAMPAIGN, AND HER HOMEMAKER
MOTHER, EDITH.
BUT GOODMAN ONLY REALIZED THE
CONSEQUENCES OF LEAVING CERTAIN
THINGS UNSAID ABOUT A DOZEN
YEARS AGO, WHEN HER MOTHER'S
HEALTH STARTED TO FAIL.
>> I THINK WE ALL HAVE THIS
FANTASY THAT WE'RE GOING TO LIVE
TO 90 AND THEN, KABOOM, YOU
KNOW?
BUT, IN FACT, THE REALITY IS
THAT MANY OF US WILL FACE A LONG
PERIOD OF BEING FRAIL AND
DECLINING.
AND I WOULD SAY THAT MY MOTHER
BEGAN TO DECLINE SOMEWHERE IN
HER 80s, REALLY.
>> Reporter: AFTER HER MOTHER
MOVED TO A LONG-TERM CARE
FACILITY A FEW MILES AWAY,
GOODMAN FOUND HERSELF MAKING
MEDICAL DECISIONS SHE HADN'T
DREAMED OF, ESPECIALLY BECAUSE
EDITH BEGAN TO SUFFER FROM
DEMENTIA.
>> MY MOTHER COULD REALLY NO
LONGER DECIDE WHAT SHE WANTED
FOR LUNCH, LET ALONE WHAT SHE
WANTED FOR HER HEALTH CARE
DECISIONS.
SO, I WAS FACED WITH A KIND OF
CASCADING NUMBER OF DECISIONS
FOR WHICH I WAS UNPREPARED.
IN FACT, BLINDSIDED.
AND I REMEMBER PARTICULARLY ONE
DAY WHEN I GOT A CALL ON THE
PHONE AND I WAS ON DEADLINE.
AND THE DOCTOR SAID TO ME, "YOUR
MOTHER HAS ANOTHER BOUT OF
PNEUMONIA.
DO YOU WANT HER TO HAVE
ANTIBIOTICS?"
AND I REMEMBER MY HANDS BEING
POISED OVER THE KEYBOARD,
SAYING, "WHAT IS HE ASKING ME?
IS HE ASKING ME, DO I WANT HER
TO LIVE OR DIE?"
YOU KNOW, "CAN I CALL YOU BACK?
COULD I HAVE A MINUTE?"
AND SO, IT WAS QUITE SHOCKING TO
ME THAT THOSE DECISIONS FELL TO
ME.
I'D JUST NEVER THOUGHT ABOUT IT.
>> Reporter: WHAT YOU'RE SAYING
IS, YOU NEVER TALKED TO HER
ABOUT THESE THINGS AHEAD OF
TIME?
>> WELL, WE DIDN'T TALK IN A WAY
THAT WAS USEFUL.
FROM TIME TO TIME, IF WE WERE
TOGETHER, MY MOTHER WOULD SAY,
"I NEVER WANT TO BE LIKE THAT,
PULL THE PLUG," YOU KNOW.
A LOT OF PEOPLE SAY THAT.
WELL, THERE'S GENERALLY NO PLUG
TO PULL.
>> Reporter: EDITH HOLTZ DIED AT
92 IN 2006.
FOUR YEARS LATER, GOODMAN CO-
FOUNDED THE CONVERSATION
PROJECT, A NON-PROFIT TO URGE
PEOPLE TO EXPRESS THEIR END-OF-
LIFE DESIRES, TO HAVE THE
CONVERSATION WITH THOSE CLOSE TO
THEM EARLY ON BEFORE IT'S TOO
LATE.
ADVISED BY A GROUP OF HEALTHCARE
PROFESSIONALS INCLUDING DR.
FORROW, ITS WEB SITE HAS
ATTRACTED ALMOST A QUARTER
MILLION VISITORS.
MORE THAN HALF HAVE DOWNLOADED
THE STARTER KIT, A KIND OF
SECURITY BLANKET TO JUMPSTART
THE PROCESS.
WHEN YOU DOWNLOAD THE KIT,
YOU'LL FIND PLENTY OF USEFUL AND
PRACTICAL ADVICE ON HOW TO GET
AN OTHERWISE UNCOMFORTABLE
DISCUSSION GOING.
FOR OPENERS, YOU ARE ASKED TO
COMPLETE THE FOLLOWING SENTENCE:
"WHAT MATTERS TO ME AT THE END
OF LIFE IS?"
AND THERE ARE EVEN SOME ACTUAL
WORDS THAT ARE SUGGESTED TO
HELP YOU BREAK THE ICE.
JUST FOR INSTANCE, "I NEED TO
THINK ABOUT THE FUTURE, WILL YOU
HELP ME?"
>> WE TALKED ABOUT NURSING HOMES
AND, YOU KNOW, LIVING AT HOME.
WE TALKED ABOUT PAIN MANAGEMENT.
WE TALKED ABOUT ALL KINDS OF
ISSUES THAT WE WOULDN'T
OTHERWISE HAVE EVER TALKED ABOUT
UNTIL THE TIME WAS UPON US.
>> Reporter: HUSBAND AND WIFE
CHUCK KOPLIK AND SUE TAFLER OF
LEXINGTON, MASSACHUSETTS,
RECENTLY HAD THE CONVERSATION
WITH THEIR ONLY CHILD, SARAH
YUKICH.
INSPIRED BY A WORKSHOP ON THE
CONVERSATION PROJECT AT THEIR
SYNAGOGUE, CHUCK AND SUE-- IN
THEIR 60s AND IN GOOD HEALTH
EXCEPT FOR RECENT SURGERY ON
SUE'S FOOT-- SAT DOWN HERE IN
THEIR LIVING ROOM.
THEY WERE MOST CONCERNED ABOUT
THE EFFECT ON SARAH.
>> I COULD JUST TELL I WAS
UNSETTLING HER, AND THAT WAS
VERY DIFFICULT.
>> I'M 32.
I HAVE A TWO-YEAR-OLD.
LIKE, I'M AN ADULT, AND I KNOW
THAT.
BUT, AT THE SAME TIME
INTERACTING WITH MY PARENTS, I'M
THEIR CHILD; I'M NOT THEIR
CARETAKER.
AND TRYING TO THINK ABOUT THAT
EVENTUAL ROLE REVERSAL IS VERY
SCARY.
>> Reporter: SO, WHEN THEY
SUGGESTED HAVING THE
CONVERSATION, YOUR FIRST
REACTION WAS?
>> I WAS HAPPY THAT THEY WERE
SUGGESTING IT BECAUSE IT'S
SOMETHING THAT I HAVE WANTED TO
TALK TO THEM ABOUT, BUT I DIDN'T
REALLY HAVE AN IDEA OF HOW TO
BRING IT UP.
>> Reporter: SARAH SAYS SHE WAS
ESPECIALLY RELIEVED WHEN THEY
SAID THAT MOVING THEM TO
MARYLAND, WHERE SHE LIVES, FOR
LONG-TERM CARE WOULD BE
ACCEPTABLE.
WAS THIS ABOUT GAINING CONTROL
OVER THE END OF YOUR OWN LIFE?
>> YEAH, I THINK IN SOME WAYS IT
KIND OF GIVES ME A LITTLE BIT OF
A SENSE OF CONTROL, A CERTAIN
STARTING TO THINK ABOUT IT.
>> YEAH, ONE OF MY BIGGEST FEARS
WOULD BE THAT, YOU KNOW, THAT
I'D BE IN PAIN, OR MAYBE I
WASN'T SO CLEARHEADED AND THE
DOCTORS WOULD BE MAKING
DECISIONS ON WHAT MY TREATMENT
WOULD BE.
>> Reporter: INDIVIDUALS, NOT
MEDICAL STAFF, SHOULD DETERMINE
THOSE ISSUES, SAYS THE
CONVERSATION PROJECT.
ACCORDING TO A SURVEY THE GROUP
CONDUCTED, MORE THAN 90% OF
PEOPLE AGREE, SAYING THEY SHOULD
HAVE THE CONVERSATION.
BUT ONLY 30% HAVE DONE SO, WHICH
IS WHY THEY'RE EXPANDING THEIR
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT CAMPAIGN.
>> YOU HAVE THAT CONVERSATION
BEFORE...
>> Reporter: GOODMAN HERSELF,
WHO USED TO COVER SOCIAL CHANGE
AND ITS INFLUENCE ON OUR
INSTITUTIONS, NOW MAKES IT
HAPPEN.
>> LET ME SHARE WITH YOU SOME
STATISTICS.
70% OF AMERICANS SAY THEY WANT
TO DIE AT HOME, AND 70% OF
AMERICANS ARE DYING IN HOSPITALS
AND INSTITUTIONS.
>> Reporter: THEY'RE CO-
SPONSORING "DEATH OVER DINNER"
PARTIES...
>> THANK YOU ALL FOR BEING HERE.
>> Reporter: ...SOCIAL
GATHERINGS TO APPROACH THE
SUBJECT IN A COZY SETTING SO
PEOPLE CAN BREAK BREAD WHILE
BREAKING THE TABOO.
THEY'VE ALSO HAD SOME LUCK
CONVINCING TV WRITERS TO INCLUDE
FAMILY CONVERSATIONS ABOUT DEATH
IN THEIR SCRIPTS.
>> IT WAS A DECISION WE MADE
TOGETHER.
>> Reporter: IT'S ALL ABOUT
MAKING THE SUBJECT SAFE,
BRINGING IT HOME, BECAUSE, THE
CONVERSATION PROJECT SAYS,
NOTHING WILL CHANGE UNTIL PEOPLE
START TALKING ABOUT IT.
YOU HAVE KIDS, YOU HAVE
GRANDKIDS, YOU HAVE A HUSBAND.
HAVE YOU HAD THE CONVERSATION?
>> OH, YES.
MY DAUGHTER'S A COMEDIAN, AND
HER FIRST RESPONSE WHEN I SAID,
"LET'S HAVE THIS CONVERSATION,"
WAS, "CAN'T WE HAVE LUNCH?"
(LAUGHS)
BUT WE DID GET THROUGH IT.
WE DID TALK ABOUT IT.
AND I HAVE TALKED ABOUT IT WITH
MY HUSBAND AND WITH MOST OF THE
PEOPLE IN MY FAMILY.
PEOPLE, WHEN THEY HAVE THESE
CONVERSATIONS WITH EACH OTHER,
DESCRIBE THEM AS SOME OF THE
RICHEST PERSONAL MOMENTS THEY'VE
HAD WITH PEOPLE THEY LOVE.
>> Sreenivasan: LEARN HOW TO
TALK ABOUT DEATH AND DYING WITH
YOUR LOVED ONES.
READ ADVICE FROM THE
CONVERSATION PROJECT ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY TONIGHT,
FERGUSON, MISSOURI, IS MARKING
ONE YEAR SINCE A WHITE POLICE
OFFICER SHOT AND KILLED MICHAEL
BROWN, AN UNARMED 18-YEAR-OLD
BLACK MAN.
THE DEATH HIGHLIGHTED EXTRA
JUDICIAL KILLINGS OF BLACK MEN
BY POLICE.
OFFICER DARREN WILSON QUIT HIS
JOB BUT FACED NO CRIMINAL
CHARGES FOR SHOOTING BROWN.
BROWN'S FATHER SAID TODAY THE
FAMILY IS STILL IN MOURNING.
>> OH, I'M STILL TRYING TO GET
THROUGH, YOU KNOW.
BUT LIKE I SAY, A LOSS IS A
LOSS.
AT THE END OF THE DAY, IT DON'T
MATTER ABOUT NO MONEY, WINNING
NO CASE OR NONE OF THAT; YOU
STILL LOST YOUR KID, YOUR
CHILD.
>> Sreenivasan: WE'LL HAVE
MORE FROM FERGUSON ON TOMORROW'S
PROGRAM.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.